[Music]
hey welcome to the keto edge summit I'm
your host dr. David jokers and I'm here
actually with a great mentor of mine dr.
Thomas Seyfried and here on the keto
edge summit our goal is really to help
dispel the myths and empower you to
improve your health and your life using
a keto edge or ketogenic lifestyle and
so dr. Thomas Seyfried actually wrote
the book the metabolic theory of cancer
and you're a professor and a researcher
at Boston College is that correct that's
correct
yep and tell us about how you got into
cancer and cancer research to begin with
we've always done work in the lipid
metabolism in cancer and basically it's
purely academic yeah but we also did a
lot of work on the ketogenic diets for
epilepsy mm-hmm and one thing led to the
other yeah
and then we realized that you could
shrink tumors by depriving them of their
fermentable fuels yeah which then put us
on the pathway to manage and try to
resolve these cancers yeah it came
through basic academics through epilepsy
because the ketogenic diets have been
used an epaulette for epilepsy r--'s
that's where all the a beginning
research was beginning wilder at the
Mayo Clinic yes back in the 1920s but we
had been we have models for epilepsy and
we were found that these ketogenic diets
are spectacular and reducing seizures
yeah and they reduce seizures by
lowering blood sugar rile evading
ketones right and then it became clear
that the cancer cells need that glucose
and the strategy could be it's even
better for cancer than it is for
epilepsy yeah absolutely and then and
the mechanism is so much clearer more
clear mm-hmm for how those reducing
glucose and elevating ketones actually
manages cancer I don't know how that
manages epilepsy right what's so trying
to fear us and our search for the apps
hundred years right
but for cancer it's clear you know how
to exploit that yeah yeah and Otto
Warburg right originally kind of
pioneered
the idea right he showed the cancers are
fermented yes okay what he didn't know
is they also ferment amino acids which
right yes Network but basically Otto
Warburg was correct regardless of what
people want to say that now didn't know
he was correct yeah absolutely because
he has a lot of critics right well they
said that he was wrong
yes but he wasn't no he was not wrong
yeah because if Warburg is correct and
most of what we're doing for cancer is
is incorrect
yes so therefore you have to say that
Warburg is wrong to preserve your own
field right absolutely so but Warburg
was correct but he didn't have all the
parts to the post yeah yeah arts
together that's right extending his work
to where it really exactly leads to the
resolution of the disease that's right
and so for the listeners out there when
he was talking about cancers they
ferment basically they break down sugar
and we also know now amino acids like
glutamine right they break this sound
that's their fuel source okay and they
run that through glycolysis and glucose
yep he's got these two fuels coming into
the cell and all or nearly all cancers
are the same disease yeah so one people
have to realize that they all think
cancers a hundred diseases it's right
it's not complicated it's a single
disease right it's a metabolic all works
or the same therapy will manage most
cancers
yeah and that's a hard pill to swallow
yeah or so many people yah institutions
private foundations they say my cancer
is different from your cancer no that's
all the same yeah and so tell us about
some of the different components between
like a normal cell and our normal cells
metabolism and then a cancer cell and
its metabolism so all of our cells in
the body respire that we use yes and
we've writes water and season the cancer
cell is different because they have a
defect in that capability
yeah the mitochondrion basically yeah
and so if the cell is going to survive
if it's not going to respire effectively
how does the cell live yeah the the
single largest consumer of energy in any
one cell is a pump on the outer surface
of the membrane
and those pumps maintain the gradient
which is life yeah when the pumps run
out of energy the cell dies yeah so you
have to have energy for the pump so if
you're not respiring to get energy where
did the cell get the energy to survive
in a ferments falls back on an ancient
pathway yeah and uses these fuels in the
environment glucose and glutamine to
generate the energy for the pumps the
problem is these cells now become
dysregulated in their yeah
when you fall back on this ancient
pathway the cells also fall back on what
they did
yes proliferate right essentially you
have a fall back on an ancient pathway
that's been that's been in evolution for
eons yeah so these cells are basically
four Mentors and as long as the
fermentable fuel is available they will
live mmm yeah it's very hard to kill
them without and that's why they keep
coming back they're resistant or
resistant you're not taking away the
fermentable fuels yeah so the more toxic
drugs you give to the patient more
radiation that frees up more fermentable
fuels right so you actually contribute
to the success of the disease by using
some of the techniques yeah we're using
in the clinics today price it quickly we
have sixteen hundred people a day dying
from kids yeah crazy enough so it's not
a you know it doesn't have to happen
yeah and most oncologists have no idea
about this if you were to go to them and
say it is sugar cause cancer Walt yeah
they're not trained to do that
very true hey their educational process
is missing the most important yeah
components right and if they're not ever
trained to do this and they're trained
to do only certain things they must know
they must think that that's that was is
what works yeah but so this is the great
we have a vast absence of knowledge
right okay and and they're not trained
so what do you do you go and go to those
guys and they're going to give you
radiation and chemo and radical surgery
because that's all they know what to do
yeah they're not yeah not bad Peter
people if they're interested in a
survivor a patient absolutely using the
the tools that they were instructed to
use them but yeah we're never instructed
to use metabolic there yes so you have
this missing link
yeah and metabolic therapy if a
knowledgeable oncologist understands
metabolic therapy they can use something
like it came out there way more
effectively right well they could
yeah the problem is it was when you go
down that path you are now at odds with
the remain strains of the AMA true in
treating patients and they feel that
this is their license and they could be
course ostracized from the group yeah
even if they want to do this yeah it
restricted from doing right is not
sanctioned yeah so then you have to go
to a higher level why are they not
sanctioning this you know then we get
into big other issues yes absolutely and
so with your research what sort of
models are you looking at and and and
what have you found as you go deeper
with your research well we we've
developed some of the best models for
yeah static cancer and Glee's nuts don't
look yeah so glioblastoma is a brain
cancer that's really growing very very
popular
it's a it's a very devastating yeah it
is I've had many many patients yeah and
unfortunately it's the standard of care
that basically is responsible in large
Norden of the demise and most of these
patients yeah tragedy yeah so and the
ones who go metabolic do much much much
better yeah so but it's very hard to
break into that mindset right and and
you're right that surgeons are
unfamiliar with this the on college
neuro-oncology yes but it's not only nur
it's like breast cancer colon cancer
every kind of kid yeah every don't know
yeah you know they hear about it but
they don't they can't implement it
because they're not sanctioned to
implement yeah yeah we have a problem
well yeah a huge problem definitely
these cancers definitely and so when
you're putting somebody into a
therapeutic ketosis for cancer right in
your research what have you found as far
as blood sugar kind of where we want to
keep that blood sugar where we want to
get those ketones up - well this is we
published the paper on the glucose
ketone index yeah calculator which
allows everyone to know where they stand
the aspect of therapeutic keyphrase so
people ask me can I eat this can I do
that good and the answer is well measure
your key in how your body responds and
how your body responds what's your index
right so if your if your 1.0 or below
you're doing well you're in therapeutic
ketose yeah so if you eat this and you
fall out of character therapeutic
ketosis and don't eat that right right
and it could vary from one person to the
next
yeah like what you can eat this other
guy can't
vice versa yeah so you just measured so
then you have a hard biochemical marker
let you let you know whether or not you
can be eating that or doing this right
okay and there's a new app that just
came out called heads-up health yeah
where they adapted the glucose ketone
index mmm together with what a daily
person would do on his daily life yeah
exercise what he eats what he does well
during the day measuring his index it
was made for cancer patients yeah
originally but now we find all these
normal healthy people right well I could
try there down toast and not get cancer
yeah are using the same app so it's kind
of interesting and it looks like that
glucose but also what you're eating what
kind of exercise you have ya know what
your days of but parts of the day where
you don't do anything or so what rate
regulates your whole activities in your
body related to therapeutic ketosis yeah
so then you have a clear idea of what
your body is experiencing over the
course of days and weeks and months
mm-hmm it gives you a kind of a report
card right on your body's health status
yeah which is really quite
it's a very empowering yeah so so
helpful absolutely yep and so obviously
there's lots of research coming out on
ketones and their ability to help
improve brain function all different
components like that and so as far as
that goes what are we finding out just
about beta-hydroxybutyrate maybe
epigenetically are you finding anything
well of course what you do in to the
academic go down to the yeah level you
know beta-hydroxybutyrate is at a
histone deacetylation yeah yeah and they
have drug toxic drugs that do that right
so the question is how high do you have
to get your ketones to have inhibit this
don't ya saddle aces and the answer is
we're not really sure right okay so this
is a this is a wonderful path to follow
in academic medicine yeah you know but
the patient with cancer or Alzheimer's
disease or something they're not really
interested in
histone deacetylases right just
interested in trying to keep the tumor
at bay or keep whatever cognitive
function they have remaining right yeah
this is a current issue and they want to
know what I have to do to stay in this
zone so I don't go down faster than I'm
then I'm on this path yeah oh they want
to stay healthy they want to so but the
academic is it more interested in the
molecular mechanisms right by which beta
hydroxy butyrate may not only target and
restrict cancer growth but also
maintaining cognitive acuity in your
brain yeah yeah and I know in your book
metabolic theory of cancer which really
made a huge cancer yeah yeah cancer has
a metabolic disease but is where you
outlined a metabolic theory of cancer
absolutely that book really had a big
impression on me when I when I first
read it and as a functional medicine
practitioner I imagined yeah that's
funny and so and this book is like the
textbook frapp for how a ketogenic diet
or ketosis really impacts these cancers
and ultimately how cancers run off
fermentation like he's talking about
great book to get especially if you're
out there and you're a health care
practitioner I would definitely
recommend getting a book like this and
really diving into it because you'll see
all the research outlined in that it
just goes in-depth and you know it also
helps support your research right and
whatnot so so anyways getting that would
definitely be great and in that you kind
of outline like how to put somebody in
ketosis okay using basically a nutrition
strategy and in a sense it was kind of a
calorie deficit for a period of time
well we're at first that was the yeah
reco nyan rights approach to this yeah
you know just bite the bullet stuffy
right it was more challenging yeah very
hard yeah anybody who's tried to go on
water only yeah fasting for days yeah
because your brain is addicted to
glucose oh yeah exactly that's how you
have the same withdrawal seizures and
symptoms as if you were addicted to
alcohol cocaine or whatever yeah you
know you go through a malaise you get
you get tired fatigued yeah sometimes
lightheaded you know and this is not fun
yeah however we're learning from all
these patients and people that are doing
this
feeding back information how to make
that transition a little bit less
difficult so I was speaking to someone
the other day and they said well what I
do is I stopped eating for just 24 hours
which is most people can yeah and then
take some ketone supplements right so
eggs a genus ketones and brings us up
and then I take those he says I took
those for a couple of days and then stop
eating mmm makes it the transition when
you're already in ketosis to a
therapeutic fast cheese is much easier
oh yeah you don't feel so you know
debilitating yeah because those
exogenous ketones give you that natural
scent for him other people say no I'm
biting the bullet right away I'm gonna
stop ya you know and then the older you
get the more the longer and more
difficult yeah without practice alright
it is to get into these zones yeah kids
young people in the 20s and early 30s
and not as metabolically damaged no
they're able to get into this yes it's
not it's doable but uncomfortable right
so if you're you know in your sixties
and seventies you try to do this man
this is like trying to break an alcohol
or drug addiction
it's not easy yeah you know your body
has been so accustomed for glucose was
yeah
it's much harder but you can do it but
it just requires a lot a lot more power
on the part of the person yeah
absolutely the discipline absolutely and
so you know typical the way I've learned
it typical nutritional ketosis is really
between 1 & 3 milli molar some are
really one and maybe up to 7 or so and
so for therapeutic that's all in the
therapeutic range that's in a
therapeutic range okay your blood sugar
measurements and you fell yeah it goes
to be in the around 70 or 80 rights
protect a liter yep you convert that to
millimolar and you do the ratio right
you're pretty fine that or below one
yeah you're in the zone in that therapy
well got to know what the zone is yeah
then you can work to get to that zone
right right so but people doing it on
their own without knowing the index
mmm oh I'm in ketosis well how do you
know I peed on the strip and told me it
was right that's not accurate you got to
have the blood ratio yeah that's the
accurate way then you know for sure
you're in there and he said that blood
ratio is one to one one to one in
millimoles yes millimoles
glucose meter gives you glucose and
milligram particulars yeah exactly so
what's off yet 7000 Provari yeah exactly
then get millimolar and then make all
kind of visions a lot of people they
just want to push a button and get the
number then yeah I would do this
arithmetic yeah you know it's very
simple but the calculator allows does
that all that for you yeah exactly so
you know you just have to get your your
numbers you put into the calculator and
there's there's your absolutely
absolutely and there's a big difference
between a 70 milligram per decilitre
blood sugar for somebody that's key to
adapted and somebody is not right so you
at 70 and you're not keto adapted you're
gonna have hypoglycemic responses you're
not gonna have any not if you're in
ketosis but if you have to drop your
blood sugar so ya take insulin right
you'd go in conscious yeah exactly have
a seizure yes it's a life-threatening
condition absolutely right but if you're
in therapeutic ketosis yep you could
push your blood Sugar's way down yeah
you know Dom D'Agostino my friend got it
down to 25 milligram is a leader yeah
you know four-day fast with ketone
supplement and he was able to push his
blood sugar to 25 so he did that way
with just a fast along with exogenous
ketones ketones yeah and he took a
photograph of the meter to let me know
it's legit yeah yeah so so I know you
can do it right and I said how did you
feel dumb and dumb said I feel spiritual
so yeah cuz I mean just those ketones
I'm sure yeah so oh yeah oh yeah but you
know how you can't do that for very long
but there are some people who can always
remain around one or a little above yeah
when you go to those extremes you're
down well below one yeah yeah three
rights 0.4 range and that's not really
sustainable long term it's hard to do
that yeah it's hard to sustain it I
don't think most people want to sustain
yeah I mean you really have to be very
disciplined absolutely Lions have to do
that more or less have to drop out of
society yeah to stay in those zones but
if you have a disease like cancer yeah
the longer you can remain in that zone
and don't forget we add on drugs and
other procedures so once the nation' is
in that zone those tumor cells become
extremely vulnerable right so low dose
they can't produce you to Theon yeah
they're sitting ducks yes for any other
things that we apply
Sarek oxygens easy yeah exam cells yeah
but you got to be in that zone to have
that effect doesn't work yeah I know in
my clinic that's what we do is ketogenic
diet so restrict a ketogenic diet
hyperbaric oxygen yes seems to work
great oh boy we'll do some nutritional
supplementation and things like that as
well but you're right and then if
somebody were to go a conventional model
right adding in that chemotherapy now
we've use very very low dose yeah low
dose because you don't need as much oh
you don't need yeah and we're showing
that too we get through the blood-brain
barrier we can keep Tokyo gin right it's
facilitate drug delivery through the
blood-brain barrier yeah it's amazing
it's incredible yeah so unfortunately
it's not being used yes yeah you know
well well thank you for being a pioneer
and leading the research on that because
ultimately that's how we get things into
into modern day practices lots of
research and continually proving that
well we have the preclinical system yes
that allow us to validate and vet some
of these things yeah so after we do this
this is where the research money comes
in yeah because it costs a lot of money
to do this absolutely but you want to be
sure that if you're taking a new therapy
yep gotta harm yourself right right so
you have a preclinical system that tells
us that this is a really effective it's
not harming the subjects and we think
just with a few changes it would be
easily adapted to the human and
generally that's what we find yeah we
don't want to be taking stuff that you
haven't vetted the preclinical system
because you could potentially harm
yourself yeah you know so you really
have to have that knowledge and that
makes everyone feel a lot more
comfortable yeah absolutely and what um
what are your thoughts on exogenously
tones and using those to help people get
into therapeutic stages to get
themselves into the zone
yeah and take the exogenous rights and
see whether or not they stay in the zone
what does it do to their zone yeah do it
naturally first right then take the
ketones yeah some of they're not all the
same yeah some of them have sugars some
of them have a lot of salt some a very
different compost yeah things you don't
know what those components are gonna do
to your physiological state so the way
to do that you put yourself into the
zone then take that brand of exogenous
yeah and say does it lower my zone what
does I'm doing there's a throw me at
acute I see yeah so even so it says
ketones will happen test how come my
blood Sugar's going higher yeah don't
use that
simple absolutely long as you have the
knowledge to know what your body is
doing where it is you know that taking
this or that will have an effect yeah
just like we learned from taking dark
red wine and expand champagnes you know
the highly expensive French small
bubbles champagne yeah doesn't throw a
lot of people out of ketosis that's good
to know
yeah right dark red burgundy wines white
wines you're thrown out deer you throw
out so yeah you know what you're capable
of doing right people need to know that
so they can be participating right yeah
yeah yeah definitely now you talked
about L glutamine as a fermenter as well
or glutamine I should say to me in the
amino acid in the body yeah glutamine
comes in broken down at the glutamate
yeah goes into the TCA cycle its
metabolized to sucks al succinylcholine
right well succinate is the it's
actually succinate fermentation okay
it's coming from glutamine ultimately
mm-hmm and that will give tremendous
energy to some of these cancer cells
yeah oh you have to shut that you have
to shut the door and that's what we're
learning now that's why you have to use
combinations of yeah these targeted
drugs and you can't do that alone but
you can't do it by diet you can't just
say I'm not gonna eat you know foods of
glued again because we have so Hulsing
yeah I've never said anywhere that a
ketogenic diet would cure cancer right
it puts you on the path for resolution
yes but by itself it probably right but
you that makes other things work we're
more more effectively and then you could
potentially have resolution yeah
absolutely so you guys are hearing it
from you know top researcher on
basically the metabolic theory of cancer
dr. Thomas Seyfried here and he's
telling you hey put your body into that
state of therapeutic ketosis and it just
allows your body your own immune system
to be able to you know basically be able
to break down cancer cells and then
combining that with different therapies
based on you know your clinical state
you know your kit your particular cancer
and what you feel most comfortable with
can be an effective strategy that you
can utilize to help overcome cancer and
you know this is why you know we're
doing research like this to get this out
to people so we can save more lives
right and so is there anything you want
to leave the audience with any sort of
thoughts or inspiration well I think
that we we have to realize base
the cancer is a metabolic metabolic
disease a genetic that's right and most
of the therapies that we're using in the
clinic yeah oxic radiations all these
things they're designed to kill cancer
cells by stopping their proliferation
right so if you take the way glucose and
glutamine you can do the same thing with
a toxicity yeah and very cost effective
you know this is another unfortunately
this may be there was the largest
weakness of our therapy yeah it's not
you can't make money on it at least not
yet
so these others are highly much more
profitable right but what is it what is
the biggest interest is in saving people
or is it in making money yeah so people
have to come to this make this decision
for themselves right but we have we have
a pathway now a pathway forward yes
people once they know how to do this and
once their caregivers know how to do
this and then we're going to manage this
disease much more effectively than we
are absolutely absolutely
yep absolutely and so again this is the
author of cancer as a metabolic disease
okay and I know you're doing a lot of
research right now tell us more about
the foundation and how they can access
it first a person was one of the first
got to read my book yeah and he was
blown away yeah and he said well how
come nobody knows about this right and
he didn't believe a lot of the things
that I said is nothing but then he
became like a journalist and he went
around and interviewed people throughout
the country and in different countries
as well to see whether or not the things
that I was writing were true or
substantiated and they were yeah so then
he decided to write his own book
tripping over the truth yep which rate
which was you know what's going on in
this cancer yeah so then he set up a
private foundation to to collect funds
that are used in large part to support
our research to him through the
university yeah so the unit Boston
College sets up grant grants with these
private foundations and they support my
research through these private
foundations and that's a very
traditional way of acting to support
academic research yeah can't people
cannot write me checks personally and I
go out and buy yeah right it was that
way it's the Thurman organization
through because I am an employee of
Boston College my mission is to train
and teach undergraduates and graduate
students and then the support that we
get through the university comes from
good foundations or federal government
grants and this kind of thing but it
comes through the university but
Travis's foundation does have an ongoing
research grant with the town college and
therefore the funds come through
traveling to Travis's Foundation and
other private foundations yeah as well
yeah so this is the way that works
because we test all of we do the
preclinical testing as soon as I see
something that work I call my coalition
clinician France for people to implement
these yeah and then we start bringing it
to the population this is what we call a
bench to bedside this is translational
research the way it should be done right
right and we're seeing immediate success
for so many patients based because we've
developed the best animal models for
brain cancer and metastatic cancer yeah
and when the and it's very hard people
say you cure cancer it might you don't
well I have cancer in mice that's like
human it's just as difficult as it is to
cure the human yeah so we have the best
models we know what works what doesn't
work and then we can make
recommendations to the champions as to
what they should do and the example of
this is what's going on in Turkey right
now we're in their clinic in Istanbul or
using our press pulse concept to treat
all these stage four cancer patients
with remarkable success Wow so we can
see the direct benefit of what we're
doing
yeah and stage for me these these are
very fast-growing cancers these are the
hardest okay and so you know with his
animal studies they're showing that hey
we're seeing results then they go and
this is this is the man who spends his
time in the lab right and then he goes
ahead he contacts his clinician friends
they start putting in an action so we're
able to see okay it's working on the
rats how about you know with people
right mice I'm sorry not rats mice and
then boom now we we start to implement
it with people are we gonna see similar
results or similar results with the dogs
yeah cancer all right they're just as
responsive as you yeah yeah that's why
it's all the same disease right these
therapy works on dogs working out human
works on mice yeah writes one disease
one mechanism of action
it's a fermenting disease taking a
vegetable fuels and you manage the
disease it's not a complicated right
we've exactly this we made a comp
yeah absolutely I just want to encourage
you guys if you are enjoying this
information you want to support dr. Seif
Reid's research and really get this
message out and and ultimately just
really apply this for yourself then I
want to encourage you to own the keto
edge summit for yourself you'll get all
the interviews the transcripts
everything you need be able to use for a
lifetime at your own time in your pace
and if you'd be so honored to consider
that you know ultimately we would we
would consider that a great honor and a
privilege so god bless you guys and we
will see in a future interview
you
[Music]